11 Light

You might have seen a beam of
sunlight when it enters a room
through a narrow opening or a hole.

You may have also seen beams of light from
the headlamps of scooters, cars and engines
of trains [Fig. 11.1 (a)]. Similarly, a beam
of light can be seen from a torch. Some of

(a) Rail engine (b) Light house
Fig. 11.1  Beams of light

you may have seen a beam of searchlight 11.1 LIGHT TRAVELS ALONG A
from a light house or from an airport STRAIGHT LINE

tower [Fig. 11.1 (b)]. Boojho recalls an activity he performed
What do these experiences suggest? in Class VI. In that activity he looked

(a) (b)

Fig. 11.2  Looking at a candle through a straight and a bent pipe

LIGHT 123

Reprint 2024-25



Any polished or a shiny surface can
act as a mirror. What happens when
light falls on a mirror?

You have learnt in Class VI that a
mirror changes the direction of light that
falls on it. This change of direction by a
mirror is called reflection of light. Can
you recall the activity in which you got
the light of a torch reflected from a
mirror? Let us perform a similar activity.

Activity 11.1
Take a torch. Cover its glass with a chart
paper which has three narrow slits as

Fig. 11.3  Reflection of objects in water shown in Fig. 11.5. Spread a sheet of

at a lighted candle first through
a straight pipe and then through Paheli remembers the story of the lion and the
a bent pipe (Fig. 11.2). Why was rabbit from the Panchtantra, in which the
Boojho not able to see the candle rabbit fooled the lion by showing him his
flame through a bent pipe? reflection in water (Fig. 11.4).

This activity showed that
light travels along straight lines.

How can we change the path
of light? Do you know, what
happens when light falls on a
polished or a shiny surface?

11.2  REFLECTION OF LIGHT

One way to change the direction
of light is to let it fall on a shiny
surface. For example, a shining
stainless steel plate or a shining
steel spoon can change the
direction of light. The surface of
water can also act like a mirror
and change the path of light.
Have you ever seen the reflection
of trees or buildings in water

Fig. 11.4  Reflection of the lion in water
(Fig. 11.3)?

124 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Look into the mirror along the
direction of the reflected light. Do you
see the slits in the mirror? This is the
image of the slits.

This activity shows how light gets
reflected from a plane mirror.

Let us play around with the images
formed in mirrors and know a little more
about them.

Activity 11.2

CAUTION
Fig. 11.5  Reflection of light from a mirror

Handle the lighted candle with care.
chart paper on a smooth wooden board. It is better if this activity is performed

Fix a plane mirror strip vertically on the in the presence of a teacher or an elder

chart paper (Fig. 11.5). Now direct the person.

beam of light on the mirror from the Place a lighted candle in front of a plane
torch with slits. Place the torch in such mirror. Try to see the flame of the candle
a way that its light is seen along the in the mirror. It appears as if a similar
chart paper on the board. Now adjust candle is placed behind the mirror. The
its position so that the light from the candle, which appears behind the
torch strikes the plane mirror at an mirror, is the image of the candle formed
angle (Fig. 11.5). by the mirror (Fig. 11.6). The candle

Does the mirror change the direction itself is the object.
of light that falls on it? Now move the Now move the candle to different
torch slightly to either side. Do you find positions in front of the mirror. Observe
any change in the direction of reflected the image in each case.
light?

Paheli wants to know, what
makes things visible to us?

Boojho thinks that objects are
visible only when light reflected
from them reaches our eyes. Do

you agree with him? Fig. 11.6  Image of a candle in a plane mirror

LIGHT 125

Reprint 2024-25



cannot be obtained on the screen in
either case.

Boojho noted in his notebook: Is What about the distance of the image
it not surprising that my image is from mirror? Let us perform another

of the same size as me whether activity.
the mirror is small or large? Activity 11.3

Take a chess board. If a chess board is
not available, draw on a chart paper 64

Was the image upright in each case? (8×8) squares of equal size. Draw a thick
Did the flame appear on top of the candle line in the middle of the paper. Fix a
as in the object? Such an image is called plane mirror vertically on this line. Place
erect. An image formed by a plane any small object, such as a pencil
mirror is erect and of the same size as sharpner, at the boundary of the third
the object. square counting from the mirror

Now place a vertical screen behind (Fig. 11.7). Note the position of the
the mirror. Try to obtain the image of image. Now shift the object to the
the candle on this screen. Can you get boundary of the fourth square. Again
the image on the screen? Now place the note the position of the image. Did you
screen in front of the mirror. Can you find any relation between the distance
get the image on the screen now? You of the image from the mirror and that of
will find that the image of the candle the object in front of it?

Fig. 11.7  Locating image in a plane mirror

Paheli made a note in her notebook:
In a plane mirror the image is You will find that the image

formed behind the mirror. It is erect, is at the same distance behind
of the same size and is at the same the mirror as the object is in front

distance from the mirror as the of it. Now verify this by placing
object is in front of it. the object anywhere on the chart

paper.

126 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



11.3  RIGHT OR LEFT!
When you see your image in a plane
mirror, is it exactly like you? Have you
ever noticed that there is one interesting
difference between you and your image
in a mirror? Let us find out.

Activity 11.4
Stand in front of a plane mirror and look
at your image. Raise your left hand.
Which hand does your image raise
(Fig. 11.8)? Now touch your right ear.
Which ear does your hand touch in your
image? Observe carefully. You will find Fig. 11.9  An ambulance

that in the mirror the ‘right’ appears ‘left’ mirror. How does it appear in the
and the ‘left’ appears ‘right’. Note that mirror?
only sides are interchanged; the image
does not appear upside down.

Now write down your name on a piece
Boojho saw an ambulance on

of paper and hold it in front of a plane
the road. He was surprised to

see that the word ‘AMBULANCE’
in front was written in a strange

manner.

Can you now understand
why the word ‘AMBULANCE’ is written
as in Fig. 11.9 ? When the driver of a
vehicle ahead of an ambulance looks in
her/his rear view mirror, she/he can
read ‘AMBULANCE’ written on it and
give way to it. It is the duty of every one
of us to allow an ambulance to pass
without blocking its way.

You might have observed that in the
side mirror of a scooter or a car the
images of all the objects appear smaller

Fig. 11.8  Left hand appears on the right side than the objects themselves. Have you
in the image ever wondered why is it so?

LIGHT 127

Reprint 2024-25



11.4 PLAYING WITH SPHERICAL Now look at your image using the
MIRRORS inner side of the spoon. This time you

Paheli and Boojho were waiting for their may find that your image is erect and

dinner. Boojho lifted a stainless steel larger in size. If you increase the distance

plate and saw his image in it. Oh! This of the spoon from your face, you may

plate acts as a plane mirror. My image see your image inverted (Fig. 11.11). You

is erect and is of the same size. Paheli can also compare the image of your pen

saw her image using the back of a steel or pencil instead of your face.

spoon. “Boojho look here! I can also see
my erect image though it is smaller in
size. This spoon also acts as a mirror of
some kind”, said Paheli.

You can also use a spoon or any
curved shining surface to see your
image.

Activity 11.5
Take a stainless steel spoon. Bring the
outer side of the spoon near your face
and look into it. Do you see your image
in it (Fig. 11.10)? Is this image different

Fig. 11.11  Image from the inner side of a
from what you see in a plane mirror? Is spoon
this image erect? Is the size of the image

The curved shining surface of a spoon
the same, smaller or larger?

acts as a mirror. The most common
example of a curved mirror is a spherical
mirror.

If the reflecting surface of a spherical
mirror is concave, it is called a concave
mirror. If the reflecting surface is convex,
then it is a convex mirror (Fig. 11.12).

(a) (b)

Fig. 11.10  Image from the outer side of a spoon Fig. 11.12  (a) A concave and (b) a convex mirror

128 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Why are concave and convex mirrors
called spherical mirrors?

Take a rubber ball and cut a
portion of it with a knife or a hack-
saw blade [Fig. 11.13 (a)]. (Be careful.
Ask an elder person to help you in
cutting the ball). The inner surface
of the cut ball is called concave and
the outer surface is called convex
(Fig. 11.13 (b)).

Fig. 11.14  A concave mirror forms a real image
of the sun

Convex surface
Take a concave mirror. Hold it facing
the Sun. Try to get the light reflected by
the mirror on a sheet of paper. Adjust
the distance of the paper until you get a

Concave surface sharp bright spot on it (Fig. 11.14). Hold
(a) (b) the mirror and the sheet of paper steady

Fig. 11.13  A spherical mirror is a part of for a few minutes. Does the paper start
a sphere burning?

The inner surface of a spoon acts like This bright spot is, in fact, the image
a concave mirror, while its outer surface of the Sun. Notice that this image is
acts like a convex mirror. formed on a screen. An image formed

We know that the image of an object on a screen is called a real image.
formed by a plane mirror cannot be Recollect that in Activity 11.2 the image
obtained on a screen. Let us investigate formed by a plane mirror could not be
if it is also true for the image formed by obtained on a screen. Such an image is
a concave mirror. called a virtual image.

Now let us try to obtain on the screen
Activity 11.6 the image of a candle flame formed by a

CAUTION concave mirror.

You will conduct Activity 11.6 in the Activity 11.7
sunlight. Be careful, never look Fix a concave mirror on a stand (any
directly towards the Sun or its image arrangement to keep the mirror steady
as it may damage your eyes. You may would do) and place it on a table
look at the image of the Sun when it (Fig. 11.15). Paste a piece of white paper
is thrown on a screen or a wall. on a cardboard sheet (say about

LIGHT 129

Reprint 2024-25



Fig. 11.15  Real images formed by a concave mirror

15 cm × 10 cm). This will act as a screen. obstruct the light from the candle falling
Keep a lighted candle on the table at a on the mirror. Is this image real or
distance of about 50 cm from the mirror. virtual? Is it of the same size as the flame?
Try to obtain the image of the flame on Now move the candle towards the
the screen. For this, move the screen till mirror and place it at different distances
a sharp image of the flame is obtained. from it. In each case try to obtain the
Make sure that, the screen does not image on the screen. Record your

observation in Table 11.1. Is it possible
to obtain the image on the screen when
the candle is too close to the mirror
(Fig. 11.16)?

We see that the image formed by a
concave mirror can be smaller or larger
in size than the object. The image may
also be real or virtual.

Concave mirrors are used for many
purposes. You might have seen doctors
using concave mirrors for examining
eyes, ears, nose and throat. Concave
mirrors are also used by dentists
to see an enlarged image of the teeth
(Fig. 11.17). The reflectors of torches,

Fig. 11.16  Virtual image formed by a concave headlights of cars and scooters are
mirror concave in shape (Fig. 11.18).

130 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



if the bell is also a kind of spherical
mirror. Can you recognise the type of
the mirror?

Note that the reflecting surface of the
bell is convex.

Activity 11.8
Repeat Activity 11.7 now with a convex
mirror in place of a concave mirror
(Fig. 11.19). Record your observations

Fig. 11.17  A dentist examining a patient
in a Table similar to Table 11.1.

Boojho observed his image in the Could you get a real image at any
shiny surface of the bell on his new distance of the object from the convex
bicycle. He found that his image was
erect and smaller in size. He wondered

Concave surface

Fig. 11.18  Reflector of a torch Fig. 11.19  Image formed by a convex mirror

Table 11.1 Image formed by a concave mirror for object
placed at different distances from it

Distance of the object from Smaller/larger      Character of the image
the mirror than the object Inverted/ erect Real/virtual
50 cm … …
40 cm … …
30 cm
20 cm
10 cm …
 5 cm

LIGHT 131

Reprint 2024-25



Fig. 11.20  Convex mirror as side view mirror Fig. 11.21  A magnifying glass

mirror? Did you get an image larger in which feel thinner in the middle than
size than the object? at the edges are concave lenses

Can you now recognise the mirrors [Fig. 11.22 (b)]. Notice that the lenses
used as side mirrors in automobiles? are transparent and light can pass
These are convex mirrors. Convex mirrors through them.
can form images of objects spread over a
large area. So, these help the drivers to
see the traffic behind them (Fig. 11.20).

11.5  IMAGES FORMED BY LENSES (a) (b)

You might have seen a magnifying glass.
It is used to read very small print
(Fig. 11.21). You might have also used
it to observe the body parts of a

Fig. 11.22  (a) A convex lens and (b) a concave
cockroach or an earthworm. The lens
magnifying glass is actually a type of a lens.

Lenses are widely used in spectacles, Let us play with lenses.
telescopes and microscopes. Try to add CAUTION
a few more uses of lenses to this list.

Get some lenses. Touch and feel It is dangerous to look through a lens
them. Can you find some difference just at the Sun or a bright light. You
by touching? Those lenses which feel should also be careful not to focus
thicker in the middle than at the edges sunlight with a convex lens on any
are convex lenses [Fig. 11.22 (a)]. Those part of your body.

132 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Activity 11.9 A convex lens converges (bends
Take a convex lens or magnifying glass. inward) the light generally falling on it
Put it in the path of sunrays. Place a [Fig. 11.24 (a)]. Therefore, it is called a
sheet of paper as shown (Fig. 11.23). converging lens. On the other hand, a
Adjust the distance between the lens and concave lens diverges (bends outward)
the paper till you get a bright spot on the light and is called a diverging lens
the paper. Hold the lens and the paper [Fig. 11.24 (b)].
in this position for a few minutes. Does
the paper begin to burn?

Now replace the convex lens with a (a)
concave lens. Do you see a bright spot

(b)

Fig. 11.24

of the candle on a paper screen placed
on the other side of the lens. You may
have to move the screen towards or away

Fig. 11.23  Real image of the sun by a convex
lens from the lens to get a sharp image of

the flame. What kind of image did you

on the paper this time, too? Why are get? Is it real or virtual?

you not getting a bright spot this time? Now vary the distance of the candle

We have seen in the case of mirrors from the lens [Fig. 11.25 (b)]. Try to

that for different positions of the object obtain the image of the candle flame

the nature and size of the image change. every time on the paper screen by

Is it true for lenses also? moving it. Record your observations as

Let us find out. you did in Activity 11.7 for the concave
mirror.

Activity 11.10
Take a convex lens and fix it on a stand

It means that we can see the
as you did with the concave mirror. Place
it on a table. Place a lighted candle at a image formed by a lens from the

distance of about 50 cm from the lens side opposite to that of the object.

[Fig. 11.25 (a)]. Try to obtain the image

LIGHT 133

Reprint 2024-25



(a) (b)

Fig. 11.25  Image by a convex lens for object placed at different distance from it

Fig. 11.26  Virtual image formed by
the convex lens Fig. 11.27  Image formed by a concave lens

Did you get in any position of the is always virtual, erect and smaller in
object an image which was erect and size than the object (Fig. 11.27).
magnified (Fig. 11.26). Could this image
be obtained on a screen? Is the image 11.6 SUNLIGHT — WHITE OR

real or virtual? This is how a convex lens COLOURED?
is used as a magnifying glass. Have you ever seen a rainbow in the

In a similar fashion study the images sky? You might have noticed that it
formed by a concave lens. You will find appears usually after the rain when the
that the image formed by a concave lens Sun is low in the sky. The rainbow is

134 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Fig. 11.29  A CD placed in sun

Fig. 11.28  A rainbow You  might have seen that when you

seen as a large arc in the sky with many blow soap bubbles, they appear

colours (Fig. 11.28). colourful. Similarly, when light is

How many colours are present in a reflected from the surface of a

rainbow? When observed carefully, there Compact Disk (CD), you see many

are seven colours in a rainbow, though colours (Fig. 11.29).

it may not be easy to distinguish all of On the basis of these experiences,

them. These are — red, orange, yellow, could we say that the sunlight is a

green, blue, indigo and violet. mixture of different colours? Let us
investigate.

Activity 11.11
Take a glass prism. Allow a narrow beam

Does this mean that the of sunlight through a small hole in the
white light consists of window of a dark room to fall on one

seven colours? face of the prism. Let the light coming
out of the other face of the prism fall on

Paheli wants to tell you
that you can see a

rainbow only when your
back is towards the sun.

Fig. 11.30  A prism splits a beam of sunlight into seven
colours

LIGHT 135

Reprint 2024-25



a white sheet of paper or on a white wall. seven segments. Paint the seven
What do you observe? Do you see colours rainbow colours on these segments
similar to those in a rainbow as shown in Fig. 11.31 (a). You can
(Fig. 11.30)? This shows that the also paste, coloured papers on
sunlight consists of seven colours. The these segments. Make a small hole
sunlight is said to be white light. This at the centre of the disc. Fix the
means that the white light consists of disc loosely on the tip of a refill of a
seven colours. Try to identify these ball pen. Ensure that the disc rotates
colours and write their names in your freely [Fig. 11.31 (a)]. Rotate the disc
notebook. in the daylight. When the disc is

Can we mix these colours to get white rotated fast, the colours get mixed
light? Let us try. together and the disc appears

Activity 11.12 to be whitish [Fig. 11.31 (b)]. Such
a disc is popularly known as Newton’s

Take a circular cardboard disc of about disc.
10 cm diameter. Divide this disc into

Fig. 11.31  (a) A disc with seven colours (b) It appears white on rotating

Paheli has a brilliant idea! She
has prepared a small top with
a small circular disc with
seven rainbow colours
painted on it (Fig. 11.32).
When the top rotates it
appears nearly white.

Fig. 11.32  A top with seven colours

136 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Keywords

Concave lens Magnified image Rear view mirror
Concave mirror Magnifying glass Side mirror
Convex lens Prism Spherical mirror
Convex mirror Rainbow Virtual image
Erect image Real image

What you have learnt

 Light travels along straight lines.

 Any polished or a shining surface acts as a mirror.

 An image which can be obtained on a screen is called a real image.

 An image which cannot be obtained on a screen is called a virtual image.

 The image formed by a plane mirror is erect. It is virtual and is of the
same size as the object. The image is at the same distance behind the
mirror as the object is in front of it.

 In an image formed by a mirror, the left side of the object is seen on the
right side in the image, and right side of the object appears to be on the
left side in the image.

 A concave mirror can form a real and inverted image. When the object is
placed very close to the mirror, the image formed is virtual, erect and
magnified.

 Image formed by a convex mirror is erect, virtual and smaller in size
than the object.

 A convex lens can form real and inverted image. When the object is
placed very close to the lens, the image formed is virtual, erect and
magnified.  When used to see objects magnified, the convex lens is called
a magnifying glass.

 A concave lens always forms erect, virtual and smaller image than the
object.

 White light is composed of seven colours.

LIGHT 137

Reprint 2024-25



Exercises

1. Fill in the blanks:

(a) An image that cannot be obtained on a screen is called
____________.

(b) Image formed by a convex __________ is always virtual and smaller
in size.

(c) An image formed by a __________ mirror is always of the same size
as that of the object.

(d) An image which can be obtained on a screen is called a _________
image.

(e) An image formed by a concave ___________ cannot be obtained on
a screen.

2. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false:

(a) We can obtain an enlarged and erect image by a convex mirror. (T/F)

(b) A concave lens always form a virtual image. (T/F)

(c) We can obtain a real, enlarged and inverted image by a concave
mirror. (T/F)

(d) A real image cannot be obtained on a screen. (T/F)

(e) A concave mirror always form a real image. (T/F)

3. Match the items given in Column I with one or more items of Column II.

Column I Column II

(a) A plane mirror (i) Used as a magnifying glass.

(b) A convex mirror (ii) Can form image of objects
spread over a large area.

(c) A convex lens (iii) Used by dentists to see
enlarged image of teeth.

(d) A concave mirror (iv) The image is always inverted
and magnified.

(e) A concave lens (v) The image is erect and of the
same size as the object.

(vi) The image is erect and smaller
in size than the object.

4. State the characteristics of the image formed by a plane mirror.

5. Find out the letters of English alphabet or any other language known to
you in which the image formed in a plane mirror appears exactly like
the letter itself. Discuss your findings.

138 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



6. What is a virtual image? Give one situation where a virtual image is
formed.

7. State two differences between a convex and a concave lens.

8. Give one use each of a concave and a convex mirror.

9. Which type of mirror can form a real image?

10. Which type of lens forms always a virtual image?

Choose the correct option in questions 11–13

11. A virtual image larger than the object can be produced by a

(i) concave lens (ii) concave mirror

(iii) convex mirror (iv) plane mirror

12. David is observing his image in a plane mirror. The distance between
the mirror and his image is 4 m. If he moves 1 m towards the mirror,
then the distance between David and his image will be

(i) 3 m (ii) 5 m

(iii) 6 m (iv) 8 m

13. The rear view mirror of a car is a plane mirror. A driver is reversing his
car at a speed of 2 m/s. The driver sees in his rear view mirror the
image of a truck parked behind his car. The speed at which the image of
the truck appears to approach the driver will be

(i) 1 m/s (ii) 2 m/s

(iii) 4 m/s (iv) 8 m/s

Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Play with a mirror

Write your name with a
sketch pen on a thin sheet
of paper, polythene or glass.
Read your name on the sheet
while standing in front of a
plane mirror. Now look at
your image in the mirror.

2. A burning candle in water

Take a shoe box, open on one
side. Place a small lighted
candle in it. Place a clear
glass sheet (roughly 25 cm ×
 25 cm) infront of this candle
(Fig. 11.33). Try to locate the
image of the candle behind Fig. 11.33 Candle burning in water

LIGHT 139

Reprint 2024-25



the glass sheet. Place a glass of water at its position. Ask your friends to
look at the image of the candle through the sheet of glass. Ensure that
candle is not visible to your friends. Your friends will be surprised to see
the candle burning in water. Try to explain the reason.

3. Make a rainbow

Try to make your own rainbow. You can try this project in the morning
or in the evening. Stand with your back towards the Sun. Take a hosepipe
or a water pipe used in the garden. Make a fine spray in front of you.
You can see different colours of rainbow in the spray.

4. Visit a laughing gallery in some science centre or a science park or a
village mela. You will find some large mirrors there. You can see your
distorted and funny images in these mirrors. Try to find out the kind of
mirrors used there.

5. Visit a nearby hospital. You can also visit the clinic of an ENT
specialist, or a dentist. Request the doctor to show you the mirrors used
for examining ear, nose, throat and teeth. Can you recognise the kind of
mirror used in these instruments?

6. Role play

Here is a game that a group of children can play. One child will be
chosen to act as object and another will act as the image of the object.
The object and the image will sit opposite to each other. The object will
make movements, such as raising a hand, touching an ear etc. The
image will have to make the correct movement following the movement
of the object. The rest of the group will watch the movements of the
image. If the image fails to make the correct movement, she/he will be
retired. Another child will take her/his place and the game will
continue. A scoring scheme can be introduced. The group that scores
the maximum will be declared the winner.

140 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Did you know?

The mirrors can be used as weapons. Archimedes, a Greek scientist, is said
to have done just that more than two thousand years ago. When the
Romans attacked Syracuse, a coastal city-state in Greece, Archimedes used
mirrors arranged as shown in Fig. 11.34. The mirrors could be moved in any
direction. They were positioned such that they reflected the sunlight on the
Roman soldiers. The soldiers were dazzled by the sunlight. They did not
know what was happening. They got confused and ran away. This was an
example of triumph of ideas over military might.

Fig. 11.34  Archimedes mirrors

LIGHT 141

Reprint 2024-25