12 Forests: Our Lifeline

One evening Boojho entered the “This is because the forests serve as
park with an elderly person. He green lungs and water purifying systems
introduced him to his friends. in nature”, Prof Ahmad explained. The

Prof Ahmad was a scientist working in children were confused. Prof Ahmad
the university. The children started realised that the children had not visited
playing while Prof Ahmad sat on a a forest. The children also wanted to
bench in the corner. He was tired as he know more about the forest, so they
had participated in the golden jubilee decided to visit it with Prof Ahmad.
celebrations of the town. After a while, 12.1 VISIT TO A FOREST
the children also came and sat around
him. They wanted to know about the One Sunday morning, the children

celebrations. Prof Ahmad told them that packed a few things like a knife, a hand

after the cultural programme, the lens, a stick, a notebook and walked

senior people discussed the town’s together through a forest trail near a

unemployment problem. A plan was village. On their way, they met Tibu, a

proposed to put up a factory by clearing young boy of their age group, of nearby

an area of the forest just outside the village, who was taking cattle for grazing

town. This would give the increasing along with his aunt. He was very agile,

population of the town a chance to get running here and there to keep the herd

jobs. The children were very surprised together. When he saw the children,

when Prof Ahmad told them that many Tibu also started walking along with

people had objected to this idea. them, while his aunt went on a different
path. As soon as they entered the forest
Tibu raised his hand and signalled them
to keep quiet because noise could
disturb the animals living in the forest.

Tibu then took them to a place at a
height to show them the broad view of
the forest. Children were surprised
because they could not see any land
(Fig. 12.1). The different treetops had
formed green cover over the land. However,
the cover was not uniformly green. The

Fig. 12.1  A view of a forest

142 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



environment was peaceful and a cool
breeze was blowing. This made children
quite fresh and happy.

While coming down, they got excited
on hearing a sudden sound of birds and
some noise from the top branches of the
trees. Tibu told them to relax since it
was a normal phenomenon here.
Because of the children’s presence, some
monkeys had climbed higher up on the
trees where they disturbed the birds.
Animals often give this type of warning
call to alert other animals. Tibu also told
that many other animals like boar,
bison, jackals, porcupine, elephants live
in the deeper areas of the forest Fig. 12.3  Forest as habitat
(Fig. 12.2). Prof Ahmad cautioned
children that they should not go deep an example of a habitat in Class VI
into the forest. (Fig. 12.3). They could see now how the

Boojho and Paheli remembered that forest provides a home for many animals
they have studied about forests as and plants.

Fig. 12.2  Some forest animals

FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE 143

Reprint 2024-25



Neem

Sheesham

Semal

Fig. 12.4  Some forest plants

covered with different types of creepers
and climbers. The sun was barely visible
through the leaves of the trees, making
it quite dark inside the forest.

Activity 12.1
Bambooo Observe the various things in your home

and make a list of those which are made
The land where the children were from material which may have been

walking was uneven and covered with obtained from the forest.
many trees. Tibu helped them to identify You might have many wooden items
sal, teak, semal, sheesham, neem, on your list like plywood, fuel wood,
palash, fig, khair, amla, bamboo, boxes, paper, matchsticks, and
kachnar (Fig. 12.4). Prof Ahmad pointed furniture. Do you know that gum, oils,
out that there are several other trees, spices, fodder for animals and medicinal
shrubs, herbs and grasses in the forest. plants are also some of the products
The forest floor and the trees were also which we get from the forest (Fig. 12.5).

144 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Based on the products that we get Prof Ahmad asked children to look
from plants, try to fill Table 12.1. One up and observe how the branches of the
example of each plant is already given. tall trees look like a roof over the other
Fill the table by adding more examples. plants in the forest. He told them that

Sheila wondered who would have this is called a canopy (Fig. 12.7).
planted these trees. Prof Ahmad replied Activity 12.2
that in nature trees produce enough
seeds. The forest floor provides Visit a forest or a park in your
favourable conditions for them to neighbourhood. Observe the trees and
germinate and develop into seedlings try to identify them. You can take the

help of some elders or books on trees.
List the characteristics of the trees that

Honey you observe, such as the height, shape
of leaves, crown, flowers, and fruits. Also
draw the crowns of some trees.

Prof Ahmad pointed out that trees
Sealing wax Wooden

statue had crowns of different types and sizes.
These had created different horizontal
layers in the forest. These are known as
understoreys (Fig. 12.7). Giant and tall
trees constituted the top layer followed

Catechu by shrubs and tall grasses, and herbs
formed the lowest layer.

Gum

Fig. 12.5  Forest products

and saplings. Some grow up into trees.
He added that branchy part of a tree
above the stem is known as the crown
of the tree (Fig. 12.6).

Fig. 12.6  Some crown shapes

Table 12.1 Plants and their products
Gum Timber Medicinal Oil
Babool Sheesham Neem Sandalwood

FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE 145

Reprint 2024-25



Canopy

Understorey

Fig. 12.7  Canopy and under storeys in a forest

“Would we see similar kind of trees They had a close look at the bushes.
in every forest?” — asked Boojho. While doing that their hair and clothes
Prof Ahmad said, “No, due to different had seeds and thorns clinging to them.
climatic conditions there are variations They came across numerous insects,
in the types of trees and other plants. spiders, squirrels, ants and various
The types of animals also differ from other small animals on the bark of the
forest to forest.” trees, plant leaves and on decaying

A few children were busy watching leaves on the forest floor (Fig. 12.8). They
beautiful butterflies fluttering here and started making sketches of these
there on the flowers of shrubs and herbs. creatures. The forest floor seemed dark

coloured and was covered with a layer
of dead and decaying leaves, fruits,
seeds, twigs and small herbs. The
decaying matter was moist and warm.

Children picked up various seeds and
leaves for their collection. Walking over
the dead leaf layer on the forest floor
was like walking over a spongy carpet!

Is the decaying matter always warm?
Prof Ahmad suggested that the children
could perform an activity to get an

Fig. 12.8  Forest floor answer to this question.

146 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Activity 12.3 depend ultimately on plants for food.
Organisms which feed on plants often

Dig a small pit. Put vegetable waste and
get eaten by other organisms, and so

leaves in it. Cover them with soil. Add
on. For example, grass is eaten by

some water. After three days, remove the
insects, which in turn, is taken by the

upper layer of the soil. Does the pit feel
frog. The frog is consumed by snakes.

warm inside?
This is said to form a food chain:

Paheli asked, “There are so many
Grass insects frog snake eagle.

trees here. Also, there are many forest
Many food chains can be found in the

like this. What difference will it make if
forest. All food chains are linked. If any

we cut some trees for a factory?”
one food chain is disturbed, it affects

Prof Ahmad said, “You have read
other food chains. Every part of the

about autotrophs, heterotrophs and
forest is dependent on the other parts.

saprotrophs. You have learnt how green
If we remove one component, say trees,

plants produce food. All animals,
all other components would be affected.”

whether herbivores or carnivores,

Oxygen

Carbon dioxide

Photosynthesis

Decomposers
Soil

Nutrients Water

Fig. 12.9  Interrelationship of plant, soil and decomposers in a forest

FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE 147

Reprint 2024-25



Prof Ahmad asked children to pick Paheli reminded Prof Ahmad that he
up leaves from the forest floor and had not explained why forests are called
observe them under a hand lens. They green lungs. Prof Ahmad explained that
found tiny mushrooms over the plants release oxygen through the
decaying leaves. They also saw an army process of photosynthesis. The plants
of tiny insects, millipedes, ants and help to provide oxygen for animal
beetle on them. They were wondering respiration. They also maintain the
how these organisms live there. Prof Ahmad
explained that apart from these animals
which are easily seen, there are several Paheli reminded their
organisms and micro-organisms that friends that they have
live in the soil. Paheli wondered what studied photosynthesis in
mushroom and other micro-organisms Chapter 1.
eat. Prof Ahmad replied that they feed
upon the dead plant and animal tissues
and convert them into a dark coloured
substance called humus.

In which layer of the soil would you
find humus? What is its importance to
the soil?

The micro-organisms which convert
the dead plants and animals to humus
are known as decomposers. These Fig. 12.10  Balance of oxygen and carbon
micro-organisms play an important role dioxide
in the forest. Soon, Paheli removed some
dead leaves and discovered under them balance of oxygen and carbon dioxide

a layer of humus on forest floor.  The in the atmosphere (Fig. 12.10). That is

presence of humus ensures that the why forests are called lungs.

nutrients of the dead plants and The children saw clouds forming in
animals are released into the soil. From the sky. Boojho recalled what he had
there, these nutrients are again absorbed learnt about the water cycle in Class VI.
by the roots of the living plants. “What Trees take in water from their roots and
happens if an animal dies in the forest?” release water vapour into the air
Sheila asked. Tibu replied the dead through evaporation.
animals become food for vultures, crows, If there were fewer trees, how will the
jackals and insects.” In this way, the water cycle be affected?
nutrients are cycled. So, nothing goes Tibu told them that the forest is not
waste in a forest (Fig. 12.9). just home to plants and animals. Many

people also live in the forest. Some of

148 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



them may belong to different tribes. Tibu showed the children droppings of some
explained that these people depend animals, and explained the difference
mostly on the forests. The forest provides between various types of droppings.
them with food, shelter, water and Prof Ahmad informed them that the
medicines. They have traditional forest officers could recognise the
knowledge about many medicinal plants presence of some animals in the forest
in the forest. by their droppings and footprints.

While Boojho was drinking water Boojho called every one and showed
from a small stream, he saw some deer them a large, decaying heap of animal
crossing the stream (Fig. 12.11). They dropping. Several beetles and grubs
disappeared into the bushes. The dense were feeding on the heap and a bunch
bushes and the tall grass provide of seedlings was sprouting. “These
animals with the food and shelter. They seedlings are of the herbs and shrubs.

Fig. 12.11  Deer in a forest

Fig. 12.12  A sapling on a wall

The animals also disperse the seeds of
certain plants and help the forest to grow

Paheli remembered that she and regenerate. The decaying animal
saw a Pipal sapling on the dung also provides nutrients to the

sidewall in her school. Can you seedlings to grow”, said Prof Ahmad.
help her to understand how this After listening to this, Boojho noted

would have happened? in his notebook, “By harbouring greater
variety of plants, the forest provides

also protect them from carnivores that greater opportunities for food and
live in the forest. habitat for the herbivores. Larger

Tibu then started looking closely at number of herbivores means increased
the forest floor. Soon he called and availability of food for a variety of

FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE 149

Reprint 2024-25



Rain

Transpiration and evaporation

The closed canopy and
many layers of vegetation
slow down the speed of
raindrops

Covered ground with
decaying material acts

Root system like a sponge

The root system helps
water to seep down in
the ground

Water table

Fig. 12.13  Rainwater drips from the trees and seeps into the ground

carnivores. The wide variety of animals suggested another route for going back.
helps the forest to regenerate and grow. While they were going back, it started
Decomposers help in maintaining the raining. However, surprisingly, they saw
supply of nutrients to the growing plants that the raindrops were not hitting the
in the forest. Therefore, the forest is a forest floor directly. The uppermost layer
‘dynamic living entity’ — full of life and of the forest canopy intercepted the flow
vitality.” of raindrops, and most of the water was

It was about afternoon and the coming down through the branches and
children wanted to go back. Tibu the stems of the trees. From the leaves it

150 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



was dripping slowly over branches of the that area were created after clearing the
shrubs and herbs (Fig. 12.13). They forest about sixty years ago. Tibu’s
found that the ground was still dry. After grandfather told them that when he was
about half an hour, the rain stopped. young, the village was not as large as it
They noticed that the layer of dead was now. It was also surrounded
leaves over the forest floor appeared wet by forests. Construction of roads,
now. But water did not stagnate in the buildings, industrial development and
forest. increasing demand of wood created

Boojho thought that if it had rained pressure on the forests and it started
so heavily in his town, it would have vanishing. He was not happy that the
flooded the drains and roads. forest adjoining their village is not

What would happen if it rains heavily regenerating and is on the verge of
in your town? disappearing due to overgrazing of

Prof Ahmad told them that the forest animals and indiscriminate felling of
also acts as a natural absorber of trees. Prof Ahmad said that if we did
rainwater and allows it to seep. It helps things wisely we could preserve forests
maintain the water table throughout the and environment as well as have
year. Forests not only help in controlling development.
floods but also help maintain the flow Children prepared a few pictures to
of water in the streams so that we get a show the consequences of such an
steady supply of water. On the other event.
hand, if trees are not present, rain hits At the end of the visit, Prof Ahmad
the ground directly and may flood the asked children to sum up the
area around it. Heavy rain may also importance of forests. The children
damages the soil. Roots of trees normally wrote: Forests provide us with oxygen.
bind the soil together, but in their They protect soil and provide habitat to
absence the soil is washed away or a large number of animals. Forests
eroded. help in bringing good rainfall in

The children spent an hour at Tibu’s neighbouring areas. They are a source
village on their way back. The weather of medicinal plants, timber and many
of the village was quite pleasant. Villagers other useful products. We must preserve
told them that due to the surrounding our forests.
forest, they receive good rainfall. The air
also remained cool. Noise pollution, too
is less because the forest absorbs the
noise of the nearby highway. What would happen if

The children learnt about the history forests disappear?
of the village. It surprised them that the
villages and the agricultural fields of

FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE 151

Reprint 2024-25



1

2 1 If forests disappear, the
amount of carbon dioxide in
air will increase, resulting in
the increase of earth’s
temperature.

2 In the absence of trees and
plants, the animals will not
get food and shelter.

3 In the absence of trees, the
soil will not hold water, which
will cause floods.

4 Deforestation will endanger
our life and environment.
Think, what we can do to
preserve our forests.

3 4

152 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Keywords

Canopy Deforestation Seed dispersal
Crown Humus Soil erosion
Decomposers Regeneration Understorey

What you have learnt

 We get various products from the forests surrounding us.

 Forest is a system comprising various plants, animals and
micro-organisms.

 In a forest, trees form the uppermost layer, followed by shrubs.
The herbs form the lowest layer of vegetation.

 Different layers of vegetation provide food and shelter for animals,
birds and insects.

 The various components of the forest are interdependent on one
another.

 The forest keeps on growing and changing, and can regenerate.

 In the forest, there is interaction between soil, water, air and
living organisms.

 Forests protect the soil from erosion.

 Soil helps forests to grow and regenerate.

 Forests are the lifeline for the forest-dwelling communities.

 Forests influence climate, water cycle and air quality.

Exercises

1. Explain how animals dwelling in the forest help it grow and regenerate.

2. Explain how forests prevent floods.

3. What are decomposers? Name any two of them. What do they do in the
forest?

4. Explain the role of forest in maintaining the balance between oxygen
and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.

5. Explain why there is no waste in a forest.

6. List five products we get from forests?

FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE 153

Reprint 2024-25



7. Fill in the blanks:

(a) The insects, butterflies, honeybees and birds help flowering plants
in                       .

(b) A forest is a purifier of                        and                        .

(c) Herbs form the                         layer in the forest.

(d) The decaying leaves and animal droppings in a forest enrich the
                       .

8. Why should we worry about the conditions and issues related to forests
far from us?

9. Explain why there is a need of variety of animals and plants in a forest.

10. In Fig. 12.15, the artist has forgotten to put the labels and directions on
the arrows. Mark the directions on the arrows and label the diagram
using the following labels:

clouds, rain, atmosphere, carbon dioxide, oxygen, plants, animals, soil,
roots, water table.

11. Which of the following is not
a forest product?

(i) Gum

(ii) Plywood

(iii) Sealing wax Carbon dioxide
(iv) Kerosene

12. Which of the following
statements is not correct? Oxygen
(i) Forests protect the soil

from erosion.

(ii) Plants and animals in
a forest are not
depedent on one
another.

(iii) Forests influence the
climate and water
cycle.

(iv) Soil helps forests to
grow and regenerate.

Fig. 12.15

154 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



13. Micro-organisms act upon the dead plants to produce

(i) sand (ii) mushrooms (iii) humus (iv) wood

Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. The Department of Environment is to decide whether some portion of a

forest in your area could be cleared for a housing complex. Write a letter
to the department explaining your point of view as a concerned citizen.

2. Visit a forest. Here is a list of points that would make your visit more
fruitful.

(a) Make sure that you have permission to go into the forest.

(b) Make sure that you can find your way around. Get a map and go
along with some one who is familiar with the area.

(c) Keep a record of the things you see and do. Observations make
the visit interesting. Sketches and photographs are useful.

(d) You may record bird calls.

(e) Collect different kinds of seeds or hard fruits like nuts.

( f ) Try to recognise various types of trees, shrubs, herbs, etc. Make
lists of plants from different places in the forest and of different
layers. You may not be able to name all the plants, but it is worth
recording and seeing where they grow. Make a record of
approximate heights of plants, crown shape, bark texture, leaf
size, and flower colour.

(g) Learn to recognise the animal’s droppings.

(h) Interview the forest officials and the people of surrounding vil
lages and other visitors.

You must never collect birds’ eggs, and their nests should never be
disturbed.

You can read more on the following website:

www.wild-india.com

Did you know?

In India the area under forest cover is about 21% of the total area. It had
steadily been falling since independence. But people now seem to have
realised the importance of the forest cover. Reports suggest that the area
under forest cover has slightly increased in recent years.

FORESTS: OUR LIFELINE 155

Reprint 2024-25