13 Wastewater Story
All of us use water in our homes and Clean water that is fit
make it dirty. for use is unfortunately

Dirty! Are you surprised? not available to all. It has
Rich in lather, mixed with oil, black– been reported that more

brown water that goes down the drains than one billion of people
from sinks, showers, toilets, laundries have no access to safe
is dirty. It is called wastewater. This drinking water. This accounts for a large
used water should not be wasted. We number of water-related diseases and
must clean it up by removing pollutants. even deaths. People even children walk
Have you ever thought where the for several kilometres to collect clean
wastewater goes and what happens to it? water. Is it not a serious matter for

13.1 W human dignity?
ATER, OUR LIFELINE

The increasing scarcity of fresh-water
Clean water is a basic need of human due to population growth, pollution,
being. Let us make a mindmap of the industrial development,mismanagement
many uses of clean water. and other factors. Realising the urgency
Activity 13.1 of the situation on the World Water Day,

( on 22 March 2005, the General
We have given one example of the

Assembly of the United Nations
use of clean water. You can add many
more.) proclaimed the period 2005–2015 as the

International Decade for action on
“Water for life”. All efforts made during
this decade aim to reduce by half the
number of people who do not have
access to safe drinking water.

Clean water There has been perceptible progress
put to use in the direction of the aim but still there

is a lot to achieve.
Cleaning of water is a process of

removing pollutants before it enters a
water body or is reused. This process of

Drinking wastewater treatment is commonly

156 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



known as “Sewage Treatment”. It takes oil, urea (urine),
place in several stages. pesticides,

13.2 WHAT IS SEWAGE? herbicides, fruit
and vegetable

Sewage is wastewater released by homes, waste, etc.
industries, hospitals, offices and other Inorganic impurities – Nitrates,
users. It also includes rainwater that has Phosphates,
run down the street during a storm or metals.
heavy rain. The water that washes off Nutrients                  – Phosphorus
roads and rooftops carries harmful and Nitrogen.
substances with it. Sewage is a liquid Bacteria                    – Such as vibrio
waste. Most of it is water, which has cholera which
dissolved and suspended impurities. causes cholera
Activity 13.2 and salmonella

paratyphi which
Locate an open drain near your home,
school or on the roadside and inspect causes typhoid.

water flowing through it. Other microbes         – Such as
Record colour, odour and any other protozones

observation. Discuss with your friends which cause
and your teacher and fill up the dysentery.
following Table 13.1. 13.3 WATER FRESHENS UP — AN

We know that sewage is a complex EVENTFUL JOURNEY
mixture containing suspended solids,
organic and inorganic impurities, In a home or a public building generally
nutrients, saprophytes and disease one set of pipes brings clean water and
causing bacteria and other microbes. another set of pipes takes away
These include the following. wastewater. Imagine that we could see
Organic impurities    –Human faeces, through the ground. We would see a

animal waste, network of big and small pipes, called

Table 13.1 Contaminant survey

S. No. Type of sewage Point of origin Contaminants Any other
remark

1. Sullage water Kitchen

2. Foul waste Toilets

3. Trade waste Industrial
and commercial
organisations

WASTEWATER STORY 157

Reprint 2024-25



sewers, forming the sewerage. It is like  Cap the jar, shake it well and let the
a transport system that carries sewage mixture stand in the sun for two
from the point of being produced to the days.
point of disposal, i.e. treatment plant.  After two days, shake the mixture

Manholes are located at every 50 m and pour a small sample into test
to 60 m in the sewerage, at the junction tube. Label this test tube “Before
of two or more sewers and at points treatment; Sample 1”. How does it
where there is a change in direction. smell?

 Use an aerator from an aquarium to
Activity 13.3 bubble air through the sample in the
Study the sewage route in your home/ glass jar. Allow several hours for
school/building. Do the following: aeration; leave the aerator attached
 Make a line diagram of the sewage overnight. If you do not have an

route. aerator, use a mechanical stirrer or

 Walk down the street or survey the a mixer. You may have to stir it

campus to find the number of several times.

manholes.  The next day when aeration is
complete, pour another sample into

 If possible, observe open drain and
a second test tube. Label it as “After

record which living organisms are
aeration; Sample 2”.

found in and around it.
 Fold a piece of filter paper to form a

In case you do not have a sewerage cone. Wet the paper with tap water
system in your locality, find out how and then insert the cone in a funnel.
sewage is being disposed off. Mount the funnel on a support
Treatment of polluted water (as you have learnt in Class VI).

Perform the following activity. It will help  Place layers of sand, fine gravel and

you understand the processes that take finally medium gravel in the funnel

place at the wastewater treatment plant. (Fig. 13.2). (An actual filtration plant
does not use filter paper, but the sand

Activity 13.4 filter is several metres deep).
 Pour the remaining aerated liquid

Divide yourself into groups to perform through the filter into the beakers.
the activity. Record observations at each Do not allow the liquid to spill over
stage: the filter. If the filtered liquid is not
 Fill a large glass jar 3/4 full of water. clear, filter it a few  times till you get

Add some dirty organic matter such clear water.
as grass pieces or orange peels, a  Pour a sample of the filtered water
small amount of detergent, and a few into a third test tube labelled
drops of an ink or any colour. “Filtered; Sample 3”.

158 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



1. Wastewater is passed through bar
screens. Large objects like rags,
sticks, cans, plastic packets, napkins
are removed (Fig. 13.3).

Fig. 13.2  Filtration process

 Pour another sample of the filtered
water into a fourth test tube. Add a
small piece of a chlorine tablet. Mix
well until the water is clear. Label the Fig. 13.3  Bar screen
test tube “Chlorinated; Sample 4”. 2. Water then goes to a grit and sand

 Observe carefully the samples in all removal tank. The speed of the
the test tubes. Do not taste! Just incoming wastewater is decreased to
smell them! allow sand, grit and pebbles to settle
Now answer the following questions: down (Fig. 13.4).

(a) What changes did you observe in the
appearance of the liquid after
aeration?

(b) Did aeration change the odour?
(c) What was removed by the sand filter?
(d) Did chlorine remove the colour?
(e) Did chlorine have an odour? Was it

worse than that of the wastewater?

13.4 WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
(WWTP)

Fig. 13.4  Grit and sand removal tank
Treatment of wastewater involves
physical, chemical, and biological 3. The water is then allowed to settle in
processes, which remove physical, a large tank which is sloped towards
chemical and biological matter that the middle. Solids like faeces settle
contaminates the wastewater. at the bottom and are removed with

WASTEWATER STORY 159

Reprint 2024-25



After several hours, the suspended
microbes settle at the bottom of the tank
as activated sludge. The water is then
removed from the top.

The activated sludge is about 97%
water. The water is removed by sand
drying beds or machines. Dried sludge
is used as manure, returning organic
matter and nutrients to the soil.

The treated water has a very low level
of organic material and suspended

Fig. 13.5  Water clarifier matter. It is discharged into a sea, a river

a scraper. This is the sludge. A or into the ground. Nature cleans it up

skimmer removes the floatable solids further.  Sometimes it may be necessary

like oil and grease. Water so cleared to disinfect water with chemicals like

is called clarified water (Fig. 13.5). chlorine and ozone before releasing it

The sludge is transferred to a into the distribution system.

separate tank where it is decomposed Become an active citizen
by the anaerobic bacteria. The biogas Waste generation is a natural part of
produced in the process can be used as human activity. But we can limit the
fuel or can be used to produce electricity.
4. Air is pumped into the clarified water

to help aerobic bacteria to grow.
Bacteria consume human waste, food
waste, soaps and other unwanted The water in a river is cleaned
matter still remaining in clarified naturally by processes that are
water (Fig. 13.6). similar to those adopted in a

wastewater treatment plant.

Did you know ?
It has been suggested that we should
plant eucalyptus trees all along
sewage ponds. These trees absorb all
surplus wastewater rapidly and
release pure water vapour into the

Fig. 13.6  Aerator atmosphere.

160 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



type of waste and quantity of waste  Chemicals like paints, solvents,
produced. Often we have been repelled insecticides, motor oil, medicines
by offensive smell. The sight of open may kill microbes that help purify
drains is disgusting. The situation water. So do not throw them down
worsens in the rainy season when the the drain.
drains start overflowing. We have to  Used tealeaves, solid food remains,
wade through the mud pools on the soft toys, cotton, sanitary towels, etc.
roads. Most unhygienic and unsanitary should also be thrown in the dustbin
conditions prevail. Flies, mosquitoes and (Fig. 13.7). These wastes choke the
other insects breed in it. drains. They do not allow free flow

You can be an enlightened citizen of oxygen. This hampers the
and approach the municipality or the degradation process.
gram panchayat. Insist that the open
drains be covered. If the sewage of
any particular house makes the
neighbourhood dirty, you should

 Don’t add to the load of
WWTP. Paheli wonders how!

request them to be more considerate
about others’ health.

13.5 BETTER HOUSEKEEPING
PRACTICES

One of the ways to minimise or eliminate
waste and pollutants at their source is
to  see what you are releasing down the
drain.
 Cooking oil and fats should not be

thrown down the drain. They can
harden and block the pipes. In an
open drain the fats clog the soil pores
reducing its effectiveness in filtering Fig. 13.7  Do not throw everything in the sink
water. Throw oil and fats in the
dustbin.

WASTEWATER STORY 161

Reprint 2024-25



In the year 2016, the Government of India has initiated a new mission known as
“Swachh Bharat” under which a lot of drives such as proper sewage disposal
and providing toilets for everyone have been started.

Vermi-processing toilet
A design of  a toilet in which humans excreta is treated by earthworms has been
tested in India. It has been found to be a novel, low water-use toilet for safe
processing of human waste. The operation of the toilet is very simple and hygienic.
The human excreta is completely converted to vermi cakes — a resource much
needed for soil.

13.6 SANITATION AND DISEASE 13.7 ALTERNATIVE ARRANGEMENT

Poor sanitation and contaminated FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL
drinking water is the cause of a large To improve sanitation, low cost onsite
number of diseases. sewage disposal systems are being

Let us look at our own country. A encouraged. Examples are septic tanks,
vast number of our people are still chemical toilets, composting pits. Septic
without sewerage facilities. Where do tanks are suitable for places where there
they relieve themselves? is no sewerage system, for hospitals,

A very large fraction of our people isolated buildings or a cluster of 4 to 5
defecates in the open, on dry riverbeds, houses.
on railway tracks, near fields and many

Some organisations offer hygienic
a time directly in water. Untreated

on-site human waste disposal
human excreta is a health hazard. It

technology. These toilets do not require
may cause water pollution and soil

scavenging. Excreta from the toilet seats
pollution. Both the surface water and
groundwater get polluted. Groundwater flow through covered drains into a

is a source of water for wells, tubewells, biogas plant. The biogas produced is

springs and many rivers. Thus, it used as a source of energy.

becomes the most common route for 13.8 SANITATION AT PUBLIC PLACES
water borne diseases. They include In our country fairs are organised
cholera, typhoid, polio, meningitis, periodically. A large number of people
hepatitis and dysentery. participate in them. In the same way

railway stations, bus depots, airports,
Bhoojo wants to know how hospitals are very busy places.
sewage is disposed of in an Thousands of people visit them daily.

aeroplane. Large amount of waste is generated

162 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



here. It must be disposed of properly must realise your responsibility in
otherwise epidemics could break out. maintaining the water sources in a

The government has laid down healthy state. Adopting good sanitation
certain standards of sanitation but, practices should be our way of life. As
unfortunately, they are not strictly an agent of change your individual
enforced. initiative will make a great difference.

However, all of us can contribute in Influence others with your energy, ideas
maintaining sanitation at public places. and optimism. A lot can be done if people
We should not scatter litter anywhere. work together. There is great power in
If there is no dustbin in sight, we should collective action.
carry the litter home and throw it in the
dustbin. Mahatma Gandhi said:

Conclusion “No one need to wait for anyone else
to adopt a humane and enlightened

We all have a role to play in keeping our
course of action.”

environment clean and healthy. You

Keywords

Aeration Contaminant Sewerage
Aerobic bacteria Sanitation Sludge
Anaerobic bacteria Sewage Wastewater
Biogas Sewer

What you have learnt

 Used water is wastewater. Wastewater could be reused.

 Wastewater is generated in homes, industries, agricultural fields and in
other human activities. This is called sewage.

 Sewage is a liquid waste which causes water and soil pollution.

 Wastewater is treated in a sewage treatment plant.

 Treatment plants reduce pollutants in wastewater to a level where nature
can take care of it.

 Where underground sewerage systems and refuse disposal systems are
not available, the low cost on-site sanitation system can be adopted.

 By-products of wastewater treatment are sludge and biogas.

 Open drain system is a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes and organisms
which cause diseases.

 We should not defecate in the open. It is possible to have safe disposal of
excreta by low cost methods.

WASTEWATER STORY 163

Reprint 2024-25



Exercises

1. Fill in the blanks:

(a) Cleaning of water is a process of removing ____________.

(b) Wastewater released by houses is called ____________.

(c) Dried ____________ is used as manure.

(d) Drains get blocked by ____________ and ____________.

2. What is sewage? Explain why it is harmful to discharge untreated
sewage into rivers or seas.

3. Why should oils and fats be not released in the drain? Explain.

4. Describe the steps involved in getting clarified water from wastewater.

5. What is sludge? Explain how it is treated.

6. Untreated human excreta is a health hazard. Explain.

7. Name two chemicals used to disinfect water.

8. Explain the function of bar screens in a wastewater treatment plant.

9. Explain the relationship between sanitation and disease.

10. Outline your role as an active citizen in relation to sanitation.

11. Here is a crossword puzzle: Good luck!

164 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



Across

3. Liquid waste products

4. Solid waste extracted in sewage treatment

6. A word related to hygiene

8. Waste matter discharged from human body

Down

1. Used water

2. A pipe carrying sewage

5. Micro-organisms which causes cholera

7. A chemical to disinfect water

12. Study the following statements about ozone:

(a) It is essential for breathing of living organisms.

(b) It is used to disinfect water.

(c) It absorbs ultraviolet rays.

(d) Its proportion in air is about 3%.

Which of these statements are correct?

(i) (a), (b) and (c)

(ii) (b) and (c)

(iii) (a) and (d)

(iv) All four

Extended Learning — Activities and Projects
1. Construct a crossword puzzle of your own using the keywords.

2. Then and now: Talk to your grand parents and other elderly people in
the neighbourhood. Find out the sewage disposal systems available to
them. You can also write letters to people living in far off places to get
more information. Prepare a brief report on the information you
collected.

3. Visit a sewage treatment plant.

It could be as exciting and enriching as a visit to a zoo, a museum, or a
park. To guide your observation here are a few suggestions.

Record in your notepad:

Place  ___________ Date  ___________ Time  ___________

Name of the official at the plant __________  Guide/Teacher ___________

WASTEWATER STORY 165

Reprint 2024-25



(a) The location of the sewage plant.

(b) Treatment capacity.

(c) The purpose of screening as the initial process.

(d) How is air bubbled through the aeration tank?

(e) How safe is the water at the end of the treatment? How is it tested?

(f ) Where is the water discharged after treatment?

(g) What happens to the plant during heavy rains?

(h) Is biogas consumed within the plant or sold to other consumers?

(i) What happens to the treated sludge?

( j ) Is there any special effort to protect nearby houses from the plant?

(k) Other observations.

For more information, consult:
Millennium Development Goals:

http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/

“Water for Life” International Decade for Action:

http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/

http://www.cep.unep.org/pubs/Techreports/tr43en/Household%

20systems.htm

“By providing clean water and sanitation to the poorest people on the planet,
we can reduce poverty and suffering and ensure education for all chil-
dren.”—UNICEF

An early engineering feat: Indus valley civilisation

One of the ancient civilisations, Harappa and Mohenjodaro had perhaps
the world’s first urban sanitation system. Within the city individual
houses, or groups of houses, obtained water from wells. There was a
separate room for bathing, and wastewater was directed to the covered
drains which lined the major streets. The oldest toilet made of bricks is
about 4500 years old.

166 SCIENCE

Reprint 2024-25



C K

Reprint 2024-25
C K



Notes

Reprint 2024-25